cattle are social creatures ingrained
with the herding instinct and as such
like to follow the leader wherever they
go however their vision is very
different from ours they see a separate
image with each eye and are easily
distracted by movement or objects they
have a range of vision that is close to
360 degrees so solid sides in the
loading and unloading areas greatly
reduce the number of distractions that
can make them fearful can focus on items
with both eyes or they can see
individual images out of each eye and if
you think about it most of your prey
animals are set up that way and that's
for the exclusive intention of being
able to detect predators they very cute
hearing they need to detect where those
predators are for example and in our
case we represent the predator when
we're working with them therefore we
need to limit the amount of hooting and
hollering and yelling and just
disruption that we give those animals
because it's very disturbing also making
very fast and abrupt movements is
something that they detect very easily
so when you work phenols you really do
need to remain calm they also have a
flight zone it is the safety zone an
animal will keep between itself and a
person or another animal the size of the
flight zone is determined by the cattles
experience with people if they have been
around people who interacted favorably
with them they will have a small flight
zone if they have been pasture animals
with a little exposure to humans they
will be highly suspicious and their
flight zone will be large this means a
person can't get too close before the
cattle may attempt an escape move you
move loose cattle by working at the edge
of their flight zone applying pressure
to the zone by moving in and out
determining the size of the flight zone
is very important if you get cattle all
excited the flight zone will get bigger
calm cattle tend to have a smaller
flight zone this is a diagram that just
sort of schematically shows the flight
zone you'll notice that the animal has a
blind spot right behind the rear end
cattle have panoramic vision they can
see all around without turning their
head except for one little blind spot
now the circle in the die
represents the edge of the flight zone
and and how do you know whether you're
inside or outside the flight zone well
if the cattle are turning and looking at
you then you're outside the flight zone
and then they move away you're inside
the flight zone another principle in
working the flight zone is you need to
alternate Li penetrate the flight zone
to make a move and then back off the
principle is you alternate Li apply
pressure on the flight zone when the
animal starts to move too fast you need
to back off and relieve the pressure
when the animal slows down you go back
and put a little more pressure on the
flight zone again
now here's an example of a person who
got too close he's running some cattle
down an alley they start to turn back so
he makes the mistake of running up there
on top of them and just getting too
close and why did the cow turn back
because they want to get this man out of
their flight zone now what he should
have done is backed off them back off
back out of the flight zone you need to
back up when the cattle give the first
little indication that they're upset or
they're going to turn back moving cattle
in a particular direction is achieved
either by being in front of or behind
their shoulder which is their point of
balance to make the animal move forward
position yourself behind the point of
balance and calmly move in and out of
the flight zone to make the animal back
up position yourself in front of the
point of balance a line of cattle in a
chute will move forward when a person
walks past the point of balance of each
animal in the opposite direction the
cattle should be eased out of the
holding pin and moved quietly into the
chute all cattle handlers must use
proper handling techniques to both sort
and load the cattle
now you also need to look at the diagram
and see it you've got a point of balance
at the shoulder this is really important
if you are behind the point of balance
at the shoulder the animal will go
forward if you're in front of the point
of balance at the shoulder it will go
backwards this diagram shows a little
handy movement pattern for getting
animals into the squeeze chute I've been
doing a lot of work with big feed yards
on getting rid of electric prods and
they say well how do we get them in the
squeeze chute without an electric prod
what you do is you walk back past the
animal and when you walk back past the
animal and you cross its point of
balance and will go forward and you can
see sort of a little triangle there you
just stand back about 3 foot away from
the squeeze chute and when the tailgate
opens just go forward walk back past the
animal